README_EN.md, before:

<p align="center">
  <img src="./docs/pictures/logo.png" width="200" alt="ToolOfCom logo"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <b>Stop sending bytes. Start executing protocols.</b>
</p>
<p align="center">
ToolOfCOM is a communication runtime engine that transforms UART / TCP / Modbus / XMODEM interactions from scattered byte operations into programmable and executable protocol workflows.
</p>


---

[中文](./README.md)

## 🌐 Overview

ToolOfCOM is not a “serial assistant” tool — it is a **communication logic runtime**.

Traditional debugging tools can only send and receive raw bytes. ToolOfCOM, however, describes complete communication flows using a DSL and executes them through a state-machine runtime, enabling **configurable, orchestrated, and extensible protocol behaviors**.

```lua
                                ┌──────────┐
                                │ YAML DSL │  ← Human-readable description of communication logic
                                └─────┬────┘
                                      ↓
                                ┌──────────┐
                                │   AST    │  ← Structured semantic tree (protocol/state/event/action)
                                └─────┬────┘
                                      ↓
                                ┌──────────┐
                                │ Executor │  ← Runtime on PC / MCU
                                └──────────┘
```

Traditional serial or communication tools focus on only one thing:

**Send some bytes, then wait.**

But real device communication is never a single request–response action.
 It is a **protocol lifecycle**, including:

- Handshake and negotiation
- Multi-frame data exchange
- CRC validation
- Retries and timeout handling
- Conditional branching and execution flow
- Final actions and transitions

**ToolOfCOM redefines communication**:

You no longer write scripts or click UI buttons.
 You describe protocol behaviors declaratively using DSL,
 and the runtime engine executes the communication flow automatically.

In other words:

```
Communication → no longer an operation
Communication → becomes state-driven executable logic
```

## 🤔 Why ToolOfCOM?

Existing communication tools suffer from fundamental limitations:

| Pain Point         | Current Situation                          |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------------ |
| Low abstraction    | Stuck at byte-level operations             |
| Fragile logic      | Maintained through scripts or manual input |
| Stateless          | Cannot express protocol sequences          |
| Poor extensibility | Each new protocol requires new code        |

The communication world is inherently a **state machine**, not a collection of byte dumps.

ToolOfCOM unlocks:

- Protocol logic → declarative DSL
- Communication sequence → state-machine executor
- Device interaction → orchestrated workflow

**From now on, protocols are not code — they are data.**

------

## 🚀 Features

| Feature             | Description                                         |
| ------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| 🧩 Declarative DSL   | Describe communication flows in YAML, no scripting  |
| 🔁 State runtime     | Executes send/receive, wait, branching, retry…      |
| 🔌 Protocol layer    | UART / TCP / Modbus / XMODEM / Custom protocols     |
| 🧱 Layered design    | Channels, drivers, and actions fully decoupled      |
| ⏱ Deterministic     | No uncertain waits; predictable execution path      |
| 🪢 Extensible        | Register custom actions without modifying core code |
| 📡 Multi-device flow | Orchestrate workflows across multiple channels      |

------

## 🧱 Architecture

                                           +----------------+
                                           |   Workflow     |  <-- YAML DSL
                                           +----------------+
                                                    |
                                                    v
                                          +---------------------+
                                          |  State Machine Core |
                                          +---------------------+
                                           /        |        \
                                          v         v         v
                                    +---------+ +---------+ +---------+
                                    | Driver  | | Driver  | | Driver   | <-- Modbus / XMODEM / TCP / UART
                                    +---------+ +---------+ +---------+
                                                    |
                                                    v
                                                +---------+
                                                | Channel | <-- Serial / Network / Custom endpoint
                                                +---------+

**Communication is no longer about “what to send”,
 but about “what should happen next”.**

------

## 📝 DSL Example

```
version: 1      # Testable with BootAppOfRAM repository

vars:
  block: 1
  file_path: ./logs/app.bin
  max_blocks: 960
  retry: 0
  max_retry: 5

channels:
  boot:
    type: tcp
    host: 192.168.31.135
    port: 4321
    baudrate: 19200
    timeout: 10
    log_path: ./logs/boot_uart.log

state_machine:
  initial: wait_handshake
  states:
    wait_handshake:
      do:
        - log: "waiting for 'C' from bootloader (XMODEM-CRC handshake)"
      on_event:
        "C": send_block
      timeout: 10000
      on_timeout: fail
...
```

**No Python, no callbacks, no if-else statements.**

Communication logic becomes a **declarative execution flow**.

------

## ⚡ Quick Start

Download the release and run directly.
 (Linux version currently unverified.)

------

## 🔌 Supported Protocols

| Protocol        | Status |
| --------------- | ------ |
| UART            | ✔️      |
| TCP             | ✔️      |
| Modbus RTU      | ✔️      |
| XMODEM          | ✔️      |
| Custom Protocol | ✔️      |

------

## 🛣 Roadmap

- Web-based visual flow editor
- Enhanced binary data transfer
- Firmware update templates
- MQTT adapter layer
- Device topology and discovery

------

## 🤝 Contribute

PRs, issues, and protocol extension plugins are warmly welcome.
 The long-term goal of ToolOfCOM is to become the **execution layer of communication protocols**.

------

## 📄 License

MIT — free for commercial, private, and hardware-integrated use.

------

## Learn More

See `docs/USER_GUIDE.md` for the full DSL grammar, state-machine semantics, protocol actions, extension methods, and best practices.

Commit message:

chore: add MIT license / 新增 MIT 许可证

README_EN.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <img src="./docs/pictures/logo.png" width="200" alt="ToolOfCom logo"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <b>Stop sending bytes. Start executing protocols.</b>
</p>
<p align="center">
ToolOfCOM is a communication runtime engine that transforms UART / TCP / Modbus / XMODEM interactions from scattered byte operations into programmable and executable protocol workflows.
</p>


---

[中文](./README.md)

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](./LICENSE)

## 🌐 Overview

ToolOfCOM is not a “serial assistant” tool — it is a **communication logic runtime**.

Traditional debugging tools can only send and receive raw bytes. ToolOfCOM, however, describes complete communication flows using a DSL and executes them through a state-machine runtime, enabling **configurable, orchestrated, and extensible protocol behaviors**.

```lua
                                ┌──────────┐
                                │ YAML DSL │  ← Human-readable description of communication logic
                                └─────┬────┘
                                      ↓
                                ┌──────────┐
                                │   AST    │  ← Structured semantic tree (protocol/state/event/action)
                                └─────┬────┘
                                      ↓
                                ┌──────────┐
                                │ Executor │  ← Runtime on PC / MCU
                                └──────────┘
```

Traditional serial or communication tools focus on only one thing:

**Send some bytes, then wait.**

But real device communication is never a single request–response action.
 It is a **protocol lifecycle**, including:

- Handshake and negotiation
- Multi-frame data exchange
- CRC validation
- Retries and timeout handling
- Conditional branching and execution flow
- Final actions and transitions

**ToolOfCOM redefines communication**:

You no longer write scripts or click UI buttons.
 You describe protocol behaviors declaratively using DSL,
 and the runtime engine executes the communication flow automatically.

In other words:

```
Communication → no longer an operation
Communication → becomes state-driven executable logic
```

## 🤔 Why ToolOfCOM?

Existing communication tools suffer from fundamental limitations:

| Pain Point         | Current Situation                          |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------------ |
| Low abstraction    | Stuck at byte-level operations             |
| Fragile logic      | Maintained through scripts or manual input |
| Stateless          | Cannot express protocol sequences          |
| Poor extensibility | Each new protocol requires new code        |

The communication world is inherently a **state machine**, not a collection of byte dumps.

ToolOfCOM unlocks:

- Protocol logic → declarative DSL
- Communication sequence → state-machine executor
- Device interaction → orchestrated workflow

**From now on, protocols are not code — they are data.**

------

## 🚀 Features

| Feature             | Description                                         |
| ------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| 🧩 Declarative DSL   | Describe communication flows in YAML, no scripting  |
| 🔁 State runtime     | Executes send/receive, wait, branching, retry…      |
| 🔌 Protocol layer    | UART / TCP / Modbus / XMODEM / Custom protocols     |
| 🧱 Layered design    | Channels, drivers, and actions fully decoupled      |
| ⏱ Deterministic     | No uncertain waits; predictable execution path      |
| 🪢 Extensible        | Register custom actions without modifying core code |
| 📡 Multi-device flow | Orchestrate workflows across multiple channels      |

------

## 🧱 Architecture

                                           +----------------+
                                           |   Workflow     |  <-- YAML DSL
                                           +----------------+
                                                    |
                                                    v
                                          +---------------------+
                                          |  State Machine Core |
                                          +---------------------+
                                           /        |        \
                                          v         v         v
                                    +---------+ +---------+ +---------+
                                    | Driver  | | Driver  | | Driver   | <-- Modbus / XMODEM / TCP / UART
                                    +---------+ +---------+ +---------+
                                                    |
                                                    v
                                                +---------+
                                                | Channel | <-- Serial / Network / Custom endpoint
                                                +---------+

**Communication is no longer about “what to send”,
 but about “what should happen next”.**

------

## 📝 DSL Example

```
version: 1      # Testable with BootAppOfRAM repository

vars:
  block: 1
  file_path: ./logs/app.bin
  max_blocks: 960
  retry: 0
  max_retry: 5

channels:
  boot:
    type: tcp
    host: 192.168.31.135
    port: 4321
    baudrate: 19200
    timeout: 10
    log_path: ./logs/boot_uart.log

state_machine:
  initial: wait_handshake
  states:
    wait_handshake:
      do:
        - log: "waiting for 'C' from bootloader (XMODEM-CRC handshake)"
      on_event:
        "C": send_block
      timeout: 10000
      on_timeout: fail
...
```

**No Python, no callbacks, no if-else statements.**

Communication logic becomes a **declarative execution flow**.

------

## ⚡ Quick Start

Download the release and run directly.
 (Linux version currently unverified.)

------

## 🔌 Supported Protocols

| Protocol        | Status |
| --------------- | ------ |
| UART            | ✔️      |
| TCP             | ✔️      |
| Modbus RTU      | ✔️      |
| XMODEM          | ✔️      |
| Custom Protocol | ✔️      |

------

## 🛣 Roadmap

- Web-based visual flow editor
- Enhanced binary data transfer
- Firmware update templates
- MQTT adapter layer
- Device topology and discovery

------

## 🤝 Contribute

PRs, issues, and protocol extension plugins are warmly welcome.
 The long-term goal of ToolOfCOM is to become the **execution layer of communication protocols**.

------

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License.  
See the [LICENSE](./LICENSE) file for details.

------



## Learn More

See `docs/USER_GUIDE.md` for the full DSL grammar, state-machine semantics, protocol actions, extension methods, and best practices.
